Title: Evaluating Vision Foundation Models for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.19802v1

Published Time: Mon, 23 Mar 2026 00:42:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Evaluating Vision Foundation Models for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 

Carolin Teuber 1 , Anwai Archit 1 , Tobias Boothe 2, Peter Ditte 2, Jochen Rink 2,3, and Constantin Pape 1,4,5 

> 1

Georg-August-University Göttingen, Institute of Computer Science  

> 2

Department of Tissue Dynamics and Regeneration, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen  

> 3

Georg-August-University Göttingen, Faculty of Biology and Psychology  

> 4

CAIMed - Lower Saxony Center for AI & Causal Methods in Medicine, Göttingen  

> 5

Cluster of Excellence Multiscale Bioimaging (MBExC), Georg-August-University Göttingen 

Abstract. Deep learning underlies most modern approaches and tools in computer vision, including biomedical imaging. However, for inter-active semantic segmentation (often called pixel classification in this context) and interactive object-level classification ( object classification ), feature-based shallow learning remains widely used. This is due to the diversity of data in this domain, the lack of large pretraining datasets, and the need for computational and label efficiency. In contrast, state-of-the-art tools for many other vision tasks in microscopy — most notably cellular instance segmentation — already rely on deep learning and have recently benefited substantially from vision foundation models (VFMs), particularly SAM. Here, we investigate whether VFMs can also improve pixel and object classification compared to current approaches. To this end, we evaluate several VFMs, including general-purpose models (SAM, SAM2, DINOv3) and domain-specific ones ( μSAM, PathoSAM), in com-bination with shallow learning and attentive probing on five diverse and challenging datasets. Our results demonstrate consistent improvements over hand-crafted features and provide a clear pathway toward practi-cal improvements. Furthermore, our study establishes a benchmark for VFMs in microscopy and informs future developments in this area. 

Keywords: Vision Foundation Models · Microscopy Images · Pixel Clas-sification · Object Classification 

# 1 Introduction 

Deep learning (DL) is the dominant paradigm in computer vision and the state-of-the-art for most vision tasks, with widespread real-world adoption. Until recently, most models were trained for specific tasks using supervised learn-ing, often ImageNet-pretrained [14]. Now, vision foundation models (VFMs) [24, 28, 32, 40] and vision–language models [13, 31, 45] have enabled zero-shot prediction, in-context learning, and efficient adaptation with small adapters.     

> arXiv:2603.19802v1 [cs.CV] 20 Mar 2026 2C. Teuber et al. DeAP ObAP Object Classification  Pixel Classification
> Fig. 1: Left: Pixel classification: embeddings from a foundation model are used either as features for a random forest (RF) or for dense attentive probing (DeAP), both yielding pixel-level predictions. Object classification: embeddings are combined with instance masks to compute per-object features (for RF) or for object-guided attentive probing (ObAP), both yielding object-level predictions. Right: Results on LIVECell [16], using 1,000 annotated pixels (top) and 100 annotated objects (bottom). DeAP and ObAP achieve the highest F1 scores, RF training is fastest.

Similar to natural images, DL now underlies most analysis in biomedical imaging, driven in particular by the success of U-Net [34] and nnU-Net [23]. In microscopy, cellular instance segmentation is predominantly addressed with DL, often pretrained on large and diverse datasets [36, 41]. More recently, VFMs for cell segmentation [1, 27, 41] derived from the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [24] have enabled zero-shot cell segmentation in many settings. However, instance segmentation is not the only highly relevant analysis task in microscopy. So are semantic segmentation, often called pixel classification in this context, and object classification . Object classification refers to separating already segmented cells (or other microscopic objects) into different classes, e.g. cell types. It represents a disjoint classification stage compared to joint detection and classification in conventional object detection . These tasks can be addressed with supervised DL given sufficient annotated data. However, the large diversity of tissues, cells, and sub-cellular structures across different organisms, assays, and treatments, as well as varying imaging conditions, leads to many distinct pixel and object classification tasks, for which annotated training data is lacking in many cases. This results in the continued popularity of tools using hand-crafted features and classical machine learning (ML) [3,4,6,7]. These tools enable inter-active training due to the low computational and label requirements of classical ML. However, they also suffer from the limitations of classical ML, making them insufficient for complex tasks. Hence, for challenging problems, users typically need to first annotate sufficient data — often using one of the aforementioned tools — and subsequently train a DL model. This requires substantial manual effort and hinders the automation of many analysis tasks. VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 3

Consequently, a DL-based solution for interactive pixel and object classifi-cation is highly desirable. Prior work has proposed pixel classification based on features from either VFMs [22, 38] or self-supervised learning [44] as inputs to classical ML. However, these methods have not yet been widely adopted, and a systematic analysis of the relevant design choices is missing. Furthermore, to our knowledge, the use of VFMs for object classification has not yet been studied. We address this research gap by systematically studying VFMs for pixel and object classification in microscopy. We analyze two key design choices: 

– The VFM: general-purpose models (SAM [24], SAM2 [32], DINOv3 [40]) and domain-specific ones ( μSAM [1], PathoSAM [19]). 

– Different learning strategies, either using VFM features as input to classical ML, or training a small adapter via attentive probing. We use Dense Attentive Probing (DeAP) [26] for attentive probing in pixel clas-sification and extend it to Object-Guided Attentive Probing (ObAP) for object classification. We evaluate all approaches with respect to result quality, label efficiency, and computational efficiency. Our study therefore serves both as a benchmark for VFMs in microscopy and provides guidance for improving anal-ysis tools. See Fig. 1 for an overview of our contributions. 

# 2 Related Work 

In natural images, open-vocabulary object detection and classification can be achieved with methods such as Grounding-DINO [25] or grounded SAM [33], which combine the respective foundation model with CLIP [31]. This enables the identification of arbitrary objects from a text prompt by leveraging CLIP’s semantic knowledge. Similarly, SAM3 [9] enables segmentation of specific ob-ject classes based on text prompts, relying on the text encoder of Perception Encoder [8]. However, vision–language models trained on natural images do not contain sufficient microscopy-specific knowledge to be applicable in the use cases we study (see [2] for an explicit study of SAM3 in microscopy). Moreover, microscopy-specific vision–language models are currently unavailable due to the lack of suitable training data. Semantic segmentation in microscopy is typically addressed with a U-Net or related architectures [23,34], and more recently with vision transformers [15]. Object classification can be performed with a ResNet [21], or similar classification networks, applied to crops of individual cells obtained via instance segmentation. Conventional object detection is less commonly used in microscopy due to the scarcity of sufficiently annotated datasets with class labels and the availability of foundation models for cell instance segmentation, such as CellPose-SAM [29] and μSAM [1], which solve many cell segmentation tasks in a zero-shot manner. Supervised learning with a U-Net for interactive pixel classification or a ResNet for interactive object classification is not feasible due to the high com-putational and label requirements. However, interactivity is important due to 4 C. Teuber et al. 

the lack of sufficient annotated data for these tasks (see Introduction). Conse-quently, tools based on hand-crafted features and classical ML remain popular. For example, ilastik [7], LabKit [4], and Weka trainable segmentation [3] im-plement pixel classification using filter banks combined with a random forest. Similarly, ilastik [7] implements object classification using morphological and texture features together with a random forest. Prior DL-based work has mainly focused on improving pixel classification by replacing the hand-crafted features. MAESTER [44] trains a masked autoencoder [20] to obtain feature representa-tions and subsequently applies clustering in the per-pixel feature space. However, the high computational cost of training and inference makes this approach im-practical for interactive use. Both ConvPaint [22] and FeatureForest [38] use pretrained models, including foundation models, to compute features that are fed into a shallow classifier. While they report improvements over hand-crafted features, these methods have not yet seen widespread adoption. Despite the availability of pretrained DL and foundation models, their adop-tion in interactive pixel and object classification for microscopy has remained limited. We argue that a key reason is the lack of a systematic analysis of the relevant design choices. Here, we therefore perform a comprehensive study of pixel and object classification using different foundation models, learning strate-gies, and strong baselines, including both the best hand-crafted features and fully supervised DL. 

# 3 Methods 

We first summarize prior work that our methods use (Sec. 3.1), then explain our method for pixel classification (Sec. 3.2) and for object classification (Sec. 3.3). 

3.1 Prior Work Vision Foundation Models refer to DL models trained on large and diverse datasets, enabling strong generalization across a wide range of downstream tasks and domains. Among the most widely used foundation models for dense predic-tion tasks is SAM [24], which supports both interactive and automatic instance segmentation. SAM consists of three main components: a vision transformer [15] image encoder, a prompt encoder, and a mask decoder. The prompt encoder processes user inputs such as points or bounding boxes for interactive segmen-tation. The mask decoder combines image and prompt features to predict seg-mentation masks. SAM was trained primarily in a supervised manner with an iterative per-object segmentation objective. The successor model, SAM2 [32], extends the original framework to support video and 3D data. It replaces the standard vision transformer encoder with a hierarchical vision transformer [35] and introduces architectural and training modifications to handle spatiotem-poral data. Similar to its predecessor, SAM2 is predominantly trained using supervised learning. SAM generalizes to many imaging modalities, including biomedical imaging, but performs worse than domain-specific models. Hence, it VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 5

was adapted to different biomedical domains by prior work, including to mi-croscopy by μSAM [1] and histopathology by PathoSAM [19]. In contrast to SAM, DINO [10] follows a self-supervised learning paradigm based on patch-and image-level self-distillation. DINOv3 [40] significantly scales up the original DINO architecture and introduces an additional training phase aimed at pre-venting degradation of dense feature representations, thus yielding particularly high resolution features. 

AnyUp Extracting meaningful information from VFM features requires high resolution, motivating learned upsampling methods like FeatUp [17] or JA-FAR [12], and AnyUp [43]. AnyUp is trained just once and can be reused at inference time across models. Given a low resolution feature map p ∈ Rh×w×c

and the corresponding high resolution image Ihr ∈ RH×W , AnyUp produces an upsampled feature map q = f (p, I hr ) ∈ RH×W ×c. Building on JAFAR’s pixel-level attention, AnyUp introduces two key modifications: a feature-agnostic convolution that maps features of arbitrary dimensionality into a shared space, and a locally restricted attention mechanism for improved efficiency. The model is trained using a combination of cosine and MSE reconstruction losses with an additional consistency regularization term. 

Dense Attentive Probing [26] establishes an evaluation protocol for VFMs on dense prediction tasks. While linear and attentive probing [30] exist, the former is restricted to linear decision boundaries, thus, in theory, inferior to most classical ML, such as a random forest. As shown in [26], neither approach is well suited for dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation. DeAP acts as a dense equivalent to attentive probing by training a lightweight probe on top of features from a frozen backbone. The probe operates on a fixed grid of queries, defined in the original image space, which attends to spatial locations in the features via cross-attention. To encourage spatial locality, DeAP introduces an attention mask M (σ), parameterized by a learnable σ. The mask is modeled as a Gaussian that depends on the distance between the i-th location in the query and the j-th location in the features: Mij = 1 /(σ√2π) exp ( −d2 

> ij

/(2 σ)) . The outputs of each attention head are processed by a two-layer FFN, and then reshaped into a spatial tensor, which is processed by a small convolutional network to produce the dense prediction. 

3.2 Pixel Classification 

We explore two different settings for pixel classification based on features from a foundation model: using a random forest (next paragraph) and DeAP (next subsection). We have chosen these methods to compare the quality of results, the label efficiency, and the computational efficiency of a well established classical ML algorithm with the state-of-the-art probing mechanism. In the first setting, we build on well established tools, such as ilastik’s pixel classification workflow [7], that compute pixel features via a filter bank and then 6 C. Teuber et al. Foundation Model Embeddings Input Image 

Object Classification 

> Embeddings Sparse Annotations

Pixel Classification Image Feature Extraction Pixel-Wise Inference Object-Wise Inference   

> Embeddings
> Compute Object-Features
> Projection onto embedding space & compute statistic sSparse Annotations Pixel-Level Features Instance Mask Train Random Forest Train Random Forest
> μ, area + label

Fig. 2: For a given image, the VFM predicts dense embeddings. Pixel classification :sparse annotations are projected onto the embedding space, the resulting per-pixel fea-tures and labels are used to train a random forest (RF). During inference, the classifier predicts per-pixel labels, shown as semantic segmentation. Object classification : in-stance masks are used to aggregate embeddings to obtain object-level features. Features and object-level labels are used to train a RF. During inference, objects are classified individually with the trained RF. 

train a random forest. Here, we use the image encoder of a VFM to compute features instead of a hand-crafted approach. For training on a given image with labels, we first apply the image encoder to the image and then resize the output (embeddings) to a shape of 256 × 256 using AnyUp (see also Sec. 3.1). The labels are resized to the same shape. The (sparse) labels are projected onto the corresponding spatial location in the feature map, yielding a set of feature vectors and associated labels, as shown in Fig. 2. Each vector has the same dimensionality as the embeddings. These vectors and labels are concatenated for all images in the training set and are used to train a random forest classifier. In our experiments, we restrict training to a limited number of labeled pixels to mimic interactive workflows where a user would annotate the data with sparse brush-strokes. To this end, we first extract all available feature vectors from the annotated pixels and then randomly sample a fixed number of vectors for training. Sampling is performed using inverse class-frequency weighting to ensure a balanced representation across classes in the final training set. During inference, the trained classifier is applied independently to all pixel features, which are obtained in the same manner as before, producing per-pixel class predictions that are aggregated into a semantic segmentation map. VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 7

Pixel Classification with DeAP We apply DeAP following the setup de-scribed in Sec. 3.1. We resize all images to a shape of 1024 × 1024 before pro-cessing them with the encoder, motivated by the input size in SAM. We chose spatial dimensions Hq × Wq for the query grid, where Hq = Wq are 18 times the original input size. A CNN decoder upsamples the cross-attention outputs to the original resolution so that each query accounts for 8 × 8 pixels in the output space. For training, we use a weighted combination of Dice loss and cross-entropy, instead of using only the cross-entropy (as in [26]) to account for class imbalance. Furthermore, we explicitly support sparse pixel annotations. To this end, we incorporate a loss mask that excludes unlabeled regions from the optimization objective. Similar to before, we employ a pixel-sampling strategy to control the number of supervised pixels. Given a fixed pixel budget npixels , we distribute the sampled pixels across the training images. If npixels < n images , we randomly select one labeled pixel from each of npixels randomly drawn images. Otherwise, multiple pixels are sampled per image. In this case, pixels are sampled in a class-balanced manner per image by selecting an equal number of pixels per class whenever possible. If only a single pixel image is sampled, its class is chosen with a uniform probability over the number of classes. This strategy enables effective training with partial annotations and imbalanced classes, allowing the model to learn from sparsely labeled datasets without requiring dense pixel-wise ground truth. In inference, the trained DeAP adapter is applied to the embeddings of an image, which are computed as in training. 

3.3 Object Classification 

Our interest in object classification is partly motivated by the fact that very accurate cell instance segmentation results can be obtained with methods like 

μSAM [1] or CellPose-SAM [29] in a zero-shot setting. Here, we therefore as-sume that an instance segmentation is available and focus on classifying the segmented instances. Following ilastik’s popular object classification workflow, we first explore training a random forest classifier on object-level features (next paragraph). We then introduce Object-Guided Attentive Probing (ObAP), which extends DeAP to object classification (next subsection). We use an existing instance segmentation to turn embeddings from a founda-tion model into object features. Given an input image, dense feature embeddings are first extracted using the model’s encoder, following the same approach as in pixel classification (Sec. 3.2). The instance masks are then used to identify indi-vidual objects in the image. For each object, the embeddings within its instance mask are aggregated channel-wise using the mean to obtain features. We add the size of the mask (area) as an additional feature (see App. 5.5). Next, the object-level class labels are matched to the features, potentially by aggregating pixel-level labels if given in that format. This approach is repeated for all im-ages in the training set, features and labels are sub-sampled in a class-balanced manner according to the specified label budget, and a random forest classifier is 8 C. Teuber et al. 

trained. During inference, the trained classifier is applied independently to each object instance. See Fig. 2 for an overview of this procedure. Image with n annotated objects object positions nN-n x y

Q

f Kf Vf Q 

> Attention Mask per Head
> is learnable W' H'
> W' H' Multi-Head Cross Attention
> VKQMask per object output NdMLP Head

Fig. 3: Object-guided attentive probing (ObAP): A VFM (frozen) extracts a feature volume from the input image. Instead of a regular grid of queries, one query is ini-tialized per object via its center, encoded by a fixed sinusoidal positional encoding. The object queries attend to the feature volume via Gaussian-masked cross-attention with a learnable bandwidth parameter σ, yielding one token per object, which are then processed independently by a lightweight MLP to produce per-object class predictions. 

Object-Guided Attentive Probing (ObAP) Building on DeAP (Sec. 3.1), we introduce ObAP for object classification, see Fig. 3 for an overview. Given the image x ∈ RH×W , the VFM’s encoder produces the feature volume Φ(x) ∈

RH′×W ′×C , as in DeAP. Instead of initializing queries on a regular grid, we use the given instances to place a query at the center of each object’s mask. These positions are encoded using a fixed sinusoidal function, yielding a set of non-learnable object queries. To handle images containing different numbers of objects, we use a fixed-size query tensor with a maximum number of objects. For images with fewer instances, the remaining query slots are padded and marked as invalid via a binary mask that is applied prior to cross-attention. Cross-attention then processes queries and feature volume Φ. It is modulated by a Gaussian mask, as in DeAP, with σ learned independently for each attention head. The Gaussian depends on the distance between query positions and locations in Φ, to adaptively determine the spatial extent of contributing features. The parameter 

σ can thus be interpreted as the size of the embedding-space region containing relevant information for a given object. The cross-attention outputs one token per object, which are processed independently with a two-layer MLP to predict the object’s class. VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 9

We train ObAP with cross entropy and use a similar sampling strategy as before to sample objects for training: Out of all instances in an image, a subset of the desired size is sampled inversely proportional to class frequencies to include underrepresented classes. During inference, we apply the VFM’s image encoder and the trained ObAP adapter. 

# 4 Results 

4.1 Datasets and Metrics 

We evaluate pixel and object classification on 5 different datasets that cover a wide range of bioimaging applications. We have chosen this data to represent di-verse use-cases from label-free microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, histopathol-ogy, and phenotypical screening. We use fixed training, validation, and test splits for all experiments. See App. 5.2 for more details on the datasets and splits. We evaluate all results using the mean F1-score over all classes, averaged over pixels (pixel classification) or objects (object-classification). See App. 5.3 for details. LIVECell [16] is an expert-validated phase-contrast microscopy dataset that contains over 3158 images with 1.6M individual cells from 8 different cell lines. The dataset provides both instance segmentation and cell line annotations. We use two datasets that were acquired with the multiplexed fluorescence microscopy method CODEX. In CRC [37], 56 proteins, corresponding to 56 channels, were imaged in 140 tissue regions from the tumor invasive front of advanced-stage colorectal cancer. To ensure compatibility with the VFMs, we collapse the channels into a single channel by summation. The dataset contains cell type annotations for 391,515 cells with 29 different labels, which we reduce to 9 relevant classes. Cells are originally annotated by centroid coordinates, and we generated segmentation masks with μSAM, using the centroids as point prompts. The HBM dataset [5] comprises multiplexed CODEX images of human bone marrow tissue using a 53-antibody panel. The original annotations include in-stance segmentations and labels for 36 unique cell types, which we aggregate into eight broader categories. The dataset contains 1,100,182 instances in total. We sum all channels into a single channel, as for CRC. PanNuke [18] is a histopathology dataset of H&E stained images, providing annotated nuclei with instance segmentations and semantic labels across five distinct cell types. The dataset consists of 189,744 labeled nuclei in 2656 images. The Planari dataset consists of 13,076 images of individual planarian flat-worms from a phenotypic screening experiment. The images were acquired with a DSLR camera. Body plan phenotypes were experimentally altered via standard RNA interference techniques. Images are divided into two classes: wild-type and phenotypically altered worms. We segmented individual worms with SAM, using the image center as point prompt. 

4.2 Pixel Classification Baselines: We compare our methods to a classical ML and a DL baseline. First, we use the hand-crafted features from ilastik pixel classification (see App. 5.4 for 10 C. Teuber et al.    

> Fig. 4: Pixel classification with a random forest across different training set sizes. Error bars based on 25 runs (5 folds, 5 repeats), 5 repeats for the U-Net, which is trained on all data. Bottom right: training (solid lines) and inference (dashed lines) times in seconds, comparing random forest (SAM features) and U-Net on LIVECell.

details) as input to a random forest. Second, a U-Net, consisting of four down-and upsampling blocks, each made of two convolutional layers followed by max pooling in the encoder and bilinear interpolation in the decoder, trained with a weighted sum of dice loss and cross entropy. 

With Random Forest: We evaluate pixel classification with a random for-est using general VFMs (SAM, SAM2, DINOv3) and domain-specific VFM (PathoSAM for PanNuke, otherwise μSAM) features (Fig. 4). See Sec. 3.2 for further methodology. Random forests are trained on 10 2, 10 3, 10 4, and 10 5 pix-els, respectively. Each training is repeated 25 times (5 folds, 5 repeats per fold). The U-Net is trained on the full training set 5 times. Training times for ran-dom forest correspond to fitting the training set (on CPU). Inference time is the average over images in the test set. For U-Net, the training time is reported until convergence (on GPU), using early stopping with a patience of 10 epochs. Inference time is measured as before. VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 11 

As expected, the U-Net achieves the highest quality for most datasets, as it benefits from end-to-end training with a large labeled dataset. Its requirement for such data makes it impractical for sparse or limited annotations. In contrast, the VFM-based approaches demonstrate a clear advantage in low-data regimes. They outperform ilastik’s features in most cases, with the exception of PanNuke. Among VFMs, the domain-specific one generally performs best, DINOv3 worst. Note that μSAM was not trained on data similar to Planari, hence it is not specific for that application. Furthermore, training of the random forest is much faster than the U-Net, enabling interactivity. See the Appendix for qualitative results (App. 5.1) and ablation of feature upsampling strategies (App. 5.5).    

> Fig. 5: Pixel classification with DeAP (solid lines) compared to random forest (dash-dotted lines). Bottom right: training (solid lines) and inference (dashed lines) times in seconds, comparing DeAP (SAM) with U-Net on LIVECell.

With DeAP: We further evaluate pixel classification with DeAP (Sec. 3.1). Fig. 5 shows the F1 scores for the different setups. Training is limited to a fixed number of pixels, as before. DeAP training is not repeated due to its long 12 C. Teuber et al. 

runtime. The reported training time corresponds to 10,000 iterations, inference time is recorded as before (both on GPU). DeAP consistently outperforms Random Forest-based methods across all ex-periments. Notably, DeAP trained on just 100 annotated pixels achieves perfor-mance comparable to or exceeding that of Random Forest models trained on 100,000 pixels. Among all models, SAM2 achieves the highest overall perfor-mance, unlike for the random forest, where the domain-specific model generally performed best. In contrast, DINOv3 yields the lowest performance, as in the random forest experiments. On CRC, PanNuke, and LIVECell, DeAP outper-forms the fully supervised U-Net baselines. Remarkably, DeAP achieves supe-rior performance with as few as 100 annotated pixels on LIVECell and CRC, demonstrating exceptional data efficiency and ability to generalize from limited supervision. However, DeAP’s training time is only marginally faster compared to the U-Net, thus not suitable for interactivity.     

> Fig. 6: Object classification with a random forest, comparing VFMs, classical features and a ResNet for different training set sizes. Error bars are derived from 25 runs (five folds, five repeats). Bottom right: training (solid lines) and inference times (dash-dotted lines) of the ResNet and random forest (SAM features) on LIVECell. VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 13

4.3 Object Classification Baselines: We compare to classical ML and DL; using the features of ilastik object classification and scikit-image [42] region properties (RegionProps). See App. 5.4 for a list of features. We train a ResNet18 with ImageNet weights as DL baseline. It is trained on object-centric crops extracted around the instance masks and class labels using cross entropy. Training on crop-level enables control over the training size. Class imbalance is addressed as in the random forest training. 

With Random Forest: We evaluate object classification with a random forest based on VFM features, same models as in Sec. 4.2 (Fig. 6). We use the ground-truth instance segmentation or, in the case of Planari and CRC where they are not available, instances predicted with SAM. Classification is evaluated for train-ing on 25, 50, 100, 1,000, and all objects. See Sec. 3.3 for further methodology. Each experiment is repeated 25 times (5 folds, 5 repeats per fold). Runtimes for the random forest are recorded as in Sec. 4.2. For ResNet18, training time is measured until convergence, using early stopping with a patience of 10 epochs. Overall, features derived from VFMs consistently outperform hand-crafted ones. Moreover, in three out of five datasets (PanNuke, LIVECell, and CRC), the domain-specific VFM achieved the highest performance, even surpassing ResNet. While ResNet outperformed the random forest on Planari (where μSAM is not very suitable) and HBM, its advantage comes at the cost of substantially longer training. Among the VFMs, DINOv3 performed the weakest, though it still matched or exceeded the ilastik features. Training and inference of the ran-dom forest is much faster compared to ResNet, enabling interactivity. Further-more, we show qualitative results (App. 5.1), an ablation on feature upsampling (App. 5.5), and object feature aggregation (App. 5.5) in the Appendix. 

With ObAP: We compare ObAP with the previous results (Fig. 7), see also methodology in Sec. 3.3. We use the same set-up as before but train each ObAP model only once due to long training. Runtimes are reported as in Sec. 4.2. ObAP outperforms random forests across most datasets and training regimes. As observed in DeAP, SAM2 achieves the highest performance, DINOv3 yields the worst results. Notably, on LIVECell, PanNuke, and CRC, the best ObAP models surpass the ResNet. Conversely, on HBM and Planari, ResNet outper-forms ObAP, aligning with previous observations on these datasets. The training times for ObAP are comparable to those of the ResNet18 baseline. 

# 5 Discussion 

We present a comprehensive evaluation of VFMs for pixel and object classifica-tion in microscopy. We evaluate two different learning strategies, using a random forest and attentive probing (DeAP and ObAP), as well as several VFMs. Our results show that domain-specific models ( μSAM, PathoSAM) perform best in 14 C. Teuber et al.  

> Fig. 7: Performance of Object-Guided Attentive Probing for object classification (solid lines) in comparison to random forest-based object classification (dash-dotted lines). Performance is reported in F1 Score and the number of objects used for training is shown on the x-axis. The bottom right plot shows training (solid lines) and inference (dashed lines) times in seconds, comparing Dense Attentive Probing with SAM and the ResNet18 baseline, reported on LIVECell.

combination with the random forest, whereas SAM2 performs best with attentive probing, which overall performs better than the random forest, beating the su-pervised DL baselines in many cases. In contrast, DINOv3 performs poorly. The foundation model-based approaches perform significantly better than classical ML, while still enabling interactivity in the case of random forest. Our work informs the integration of VFMs into pixel and object classification within user-friendly tools, such as ilastik, μSAM, or CellPose (the latter two offer tools and models): SAM-based models clearly improve over classical features and are preferable over DINO; domain-specific models have an edge when used with a random forest. Full interactivity is only possible with a random forest, attentive probing yields higher quality if longer training and higher computational demand can be afforded, potentially enabling hybrid solutions (interactive training with random forest followed by training attentive probing). Furthermore, our work provides a benchmark for future microscopy VFMs. VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 15 

Looking ahead, the efficiency of DeAP and ObAP in low-resource settings, such as training on a CPU, deserves further investigation. Deploying it in such a manner would directly enable high-quality, interactive pixel and object classi-fication. More efficient training should be possible due to the small size of the adapters. Furthermore, our methodology could be combined with other domain-specific VFMs. For example, KRONOS [39] for spatial proteomics that could be applied to CRC, HBM, or similar data. This model handles arbitrary fluores-cent channels, which would avoid the channel reduction we had to apply, that contributed to the low quality of results for CRC and HBM. Similarly, advanced VFMs for histopathology, e.g. Uni V2 [11], could improve results in that domain. 

# Acknowledgements 

Anwai Archit is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, Ger-man Research Foundation) - PA 4341/2-1. Constantin Pape is supported by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy - EXC 2067/1-390729940. This work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Culture of Lower Saxony through funds from the program zukunft.niedersachsen of the Volkswagen Foundation for the “CAIMed – Lower Saxony Center for Artificial Intelligence and Causal Methods in Medicine” project (grant no. ZN4257). This work is also supported by the Google Research Scholarship “Vision Foundation Models for Bioimage Segmentation”. We also gratefully acknowledge the computing time granted by the Resource Allocation Board and provided on the supercomputer Emmy at NHR@Göttingen as part of the NHR infrastructure, under the project nim00007. We thank Timo Lüddecke for his advice and support regarding the implementation of DeAP. 16 C. Teuber et al. 

# References 

1. Archit, A., Freckmann, L., Nair, S., Khalid, N., Hilt, P., Rajashekar, V., Freitag, M., Teuber, C., Spitzner, M., Tapia Contreras, C., et al.: Segment anything for microscopy. Nature methods 22 (3), 579–591 (2025) 2. Archit, A., Pape, C.: Revisiting foundation models for cell instance segmentation. In: Medical Imaging with Deep Learning (2026) 3. Arganda-Carreras, I., Kaynig, V., Rueden, C., Eliceiri, K.W., Schindelin, J., Car-dona, A., Sebastian Seung, H.: Trainable weka segmentation: a machine learning tool for microscopy pixel classification. Bioinformatics 33 (15), 2424–2426 (2017) 4. Arzt, M., Deschamps, J., Schmied, C., Pietzsch, T., Schmidt, D., Tomancak, P., Haase, R., Jug, F.: Labkit: labeling and segmentation toolkit for big image data. Frontiers in computer science 4, 777728 (2022) 5. Bandyopadhyay, S., Duffy, M.P., Ahn, K.J., Sussman, J.H., Pang, M., Smith, D., Duncan, G., Zhang, I., Huang, J., Lin, Y., Xiong, B., Imtiaz, T., Chen, C.H., Thadi, A., Chen, C., Xu, J., Reichart, M., Martinez, Z., Diorio, C., Chen, C., Pillai, V., Snaith, O., Oldridge, D., Bhattacharyya, S., Maillard, I., Carroll, M., Nelson, C., Qin, L., Tan, K.: Mapping the cellular biogeography of human bone marrow niches using single-cell transcriptomics and proteomic imaging. Cell 187 (12), 3120– 3140.e29 (Jun 2024). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.04.013 , http: //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.04.013 

6. Bankhead, P., Loughrey, M.B., Fernández, J.A., Dombrowski, Y., McArt, D.G., Dunne, P.D., McQuaid, S., Gray, R.T., Murray, L.J., Coleman, H.G., et al.: Qupath: Open source software for digital pathology image analysis. Scientific re-ports 7(1), 1–7 (2017) 7. Berg, S., Kutra, D., Kroeger, T., Straehle, C.N., Kausler, B.X., Haubold, C., Schiegg, M., Ales, J., Beier, T., Rudy, M., et al.: Ilastik: interactive machine learn-ing for (bio) image analysis. Nature methods 16 (12), 1226–1232 (2019) 8. Bolya, D., Huang, P.Y., Sun, P., Cho, J.H., Madotto, A., Wei, C., Ma, T., Zhi, J., Rajasegaran, J., Rasheed, H., et al.: Perception encoder: The best visual em-beddings are not at the output of the network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13181 (2025) 9. Carion, N., Gustafson, L., Hu, Y.T., Debnath, S., Hu, R., Suris, D., Ryali, C., Alwala, K.V., Khedr, H., Huang, A., et al.: Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 (2025) 10. Caron, M., Touvron, H., Misra, I., Jégou, H., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P., Joulin, A.: Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers (2021). https:// doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2104.14294 , https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14294 

11. Chen, R.J., Ding, T., Lu, M.Y., Williamson, D.F., Jaume, G., Song, A.H., Chen, B., Zhang, A., Shao, D., Shaban, M., et al.: Towards a general-purpose foundation model for computational pathology. Nature medicine 30 (3), 850–862 (2024) 12. Couairon, P., Chambon, L., Serrano, L., Haugeard, J.E., Cord, M., Thome, N.: Jafar: Jack up any feature at any resolution (2025). https://doi.org/10.48550/ ARXIV.2506.11136 , https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11136 

13. Deitke, M., Clark, C., Lee, S., Tripathi, R., Yang, Y., Park, J., Salehi, M., Muen-nighoff, N., Lo, K., Soldaini, L., et al.: Molmo and pixmo: Open weights and open data for state-of-the-art vision-language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2409.17146 (2024) 14. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.J., Li, K., Fei-Fei, L.: Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In: 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 17 Pattern Recognition. p. 248–255. IEEE (Jun 2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/ cvpr.2009.5206848 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848 

15. Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., Houlsby, N.: An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale (2020). 

https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2010.11929 , https://arxiv.org/abs/2010. 11929 

16. Edlund, C., Jackson, T.R., Khalid, N., Bevan, N., Dale, T., Dengel, A., Ahmed, S., Trygg, J., Sjögren, R.: Livecell—a large-scale dataset for label-free live cell seg-mentation. Nature Methods 18 (9), 1038–1045 (Aug 2021). https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41592-021-01249-6 , http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01249-6 

17. Fu, S., Hamilton, M., Brandt, L., Feldman, A., Zhang, Z., Freeman, W.T.: Featup: A model-agnostic framework for features at any resolution (2024), https://arxiv. org/abs/2403.10516 

18. Gamper, J., Koohbanani, N.A., Benes, K., Graham, S., Jahanifar, M., Khurram, S.A., Azam, A., Hewitt, K., Rajpoot, N.: Pannuke dataset extension, insights and baselines (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.10778 

19. Griebel, T., Archit, A., Pape, C.: Segment anything for histopathology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00408 (2025) 20. He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Dollár, P., Girshick, R.: Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 16000–16009 (2022) 21. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 770–778 (2016) 22. Hinderling, L., Witz, G., Schwob, R., Stojiljković, A., Dobrzyński, M., Vladymyrov, M., Frei, J., Grädel, B., Frismantiene, A., Pertz, O.: Convpaint-interactive pixel classification using pretrained neural networks. bioRxiv pp. 2024–09 (2024) 23. Isensee, F., Jaeger, P.F., Kohl, S.A., Petersen, J., Maier-Hein, K.H.: nnu-net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation. Nature methods 18 (2), 203–211 (2021) 24. Kirillov, A., Mintun, E., Ravi, N., Mao, H., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Xiao, T., Whitehead, S., Berg, A.C., Lo, W.Y., et al.: Segment anything. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 4015–4026 (2023) 25. Liu, S., Zeng, Z., Ren, T., Li, F., Zhang, H., Yang, J., Li, C., Yang, J., Su, H., Zhu, J., et al.: Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. arxiv 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499 (2023) 26. Lüddecke, T., Ecker, A.S.: Characterizing vision backbones for dense prediction with dense attentive probing. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2025), 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=neMAx4uBlh , expert Certification 27. Marks, M., Israel, U., Dilip, R., Li, Q., Yu, C., Laubscher, E., Iqbal, A., Pradhan, E., Ates, A., Abt, M., et al.: Cellsam: a foundation model for cell segmentation. Nature Methods pp. 1–9 (2025) 28. Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec, M., Khalidov, V., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F., El-Nouby, A., et al.: Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 (2023) 29. Pachitariu, M., Rariden, M., Stringer, C.: Cellpose-sam: superhuman generalization for cellular segmentation. BioRxiv pp. 2025–04 (2025) 30. Psomas, B., Christopoulos, D., Baltzi, E., Kakogeorgiou, I., Aravanis, T., Ko-modakis, N., Karantzalos, K., Avrithis, Y., Tolias, G.: Attention, please! revisiting 18 C. Teuber et al. attentive probing through the lens of efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10178 (2025) 31. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 8748–8763. PmLR (2021) 32. Ravi, N., Gabeur, V., Hu, Y.T., Hu, R., Ryali, C., Ma, T., Khedr, H., Rädle, R., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., et al.: Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 (2024) 33. Ren, T., Liu, S., Zeng, A., Lin, J., Li, K., Cao, H., Chen, J., Huang, X., Chen, Y., Yan, F., et al.: Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159 (2024) 34. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T.: U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-cal image segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention. pp. 234–241. Springer (2015) 35. Ryali, C., Hu, Y.T., Bolya, D., Wei, C., Fan, H., Huang, P.Y., Aggarwal, V., Chowdhury, A., Poursaeed, O., Hoffman, J., Malik, J., Li, Y., Feichtenhofer, C.: Hi-era: A hierarchical vision transformer without the bells-and-whistles (2023). https: //doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2306.00989 , https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00989 

36. Schmidt, U., Weigert, M., Broaddus, C., Myers, G.: Cell detection with star-convex polygons. In: International conference on medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention. pp. 265–273. Springer (2018) 37. Schürch, C.M., Bhate, S., Barlow, G., Phillips, D., Noti, L., Zlobec, I., Chu, P., Black, S., Demeter, J., McIlwain, D., Samusik, N., Goltsev, Y., Nolan, G.: High-dimensional imaging of colorectal carcinoma and other tumors with 50+ mark-ers (2020). https://doi.org/10.7937/TCIA.2020.FQN0- 0326 , https://www. cancerimagingarchive.net/collection/crc_ffpe-codex_cellneighs/ 

38. Seifi, M., Dalle Nogare, D., Battagliotti, J.M., Galinova, V., Rao, A.K., Jouneau, P.H., Archit, A., Pape, C., Decelle, J., et al.: Featureforest: the power of foundation models, the usability of random forests. npj Imaging 3(1), 32 (2025) 39. Shaban, M., Chang, Y., Qiu, H., Yeo, Y.Y., Song, A.H., Jaume, G., Wang, Y., Weishaupt, L.L., Ding, T., Vaidya, A., et al.: A foundation model for spatial pro-teomics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03373 (2025) 40. Siméoni, O., Vo, H.V., Seitzer, M., Baldassarre, F., Oquab, M.a.d.: Dinov3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 2(4), 5 (2025) 41. Stringer, C., Wang, T., Michaelos, M., Pachitariu, M.: Cellpose: a generalist algo-rithm for cellular segmentation. Nature methods 18 (1), 100–106 (2021) 42. van der Walt, S., Schönberger, J.L., Nunez-Iglesias, J., Boulogne, F., Warner, J.D., Yager, N., Gouillart, E., Yu, T., contributors, t.s.i.: scikit-image: Image processing in python (2014). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1407.6245 , https://arxiv. org/abs/1407.6245 

43. Wimmer, T., Truong, P., Rakotosaona, M.J., Oechsle, M., Tombari, F., Schiele, B., Lenssen, J.E.: Anyup: Universal feature upsampling (2025). https://doi.org/10. 48550/ARXIV.2510.12764 , https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.12764 

44. Xie, R., Pang, K., Bader, G.D., Wang, B.: Maester: masked autoencoder guided segmentation at pixel resolution for accurate, self-supervised subcellular structure recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3292–3301 (2023) 45. Zhai, X., Mustafa, B., Kolesnikov, A., Beyer, L.: Sigmoid loss for language im-age pre-training. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 11975–11986 (2023) VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 19 

# Appendix 

5.1 Qualitative Results 

Fig. 8 presents qualitative examples of the predictions obtained with pixel-level and object-level classification models across the considered datasets. For each experiment, domain-specific SAM features were used (PathoSAM for PanNuke and μSAM elsewhere) and the classical features from ilastik are added as a baseline. For object classification, semantic segmentation visualizations are gen-erated by assigning the predicted class labels to instance segmentations, using ground-truth instance masks when available and μSAM- / SAM-based instance segmentations for CRC and Planaria. The examples illustrate typical prediction behavior and provide an intuitive comparison between pixel- and object-based approaches. Note that for the pixel classification background is segmented as a foreground class in some cases (LIVE-Cell and HBM). This is likely due to densely growing cells and due to the fact that we do not oversample the background class with respect to the different foreground classes. Further, note that interactive (human-in-the-loop) annota-tion typically yields better results for these segmentation tasks by providing labels to correct errors in a targeted manner. Simulating such labeling schemes is out-of-scope for our work and would also limit the fair comparison between models. Instead, our evaluation schemes provide an objective evaluation of dif-ferent methods for pixel (and object) classification that will inform practical applications of these methods. 20 C. Teuber et al. Pixel Classification LIVECell PanNuke Object Classification RF ObAP  RF DeAP  ilastik  Ground Truth HBM CRC Planari ilastik 

Fig. 8: Qualitative results for pixel- and object classification across datasets using domain-specific SAM features. For object classification, models were trained using 100 annotated objects; pixel classification models were trained with 10000 annotated pixels. For object classification, the semantic segmentations are obtained by projecting the predicted object classes onto instances (ground-truth instance masks where available; 

μSAM / SAM-based for CRC and Planaria). VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 21 

5.2 Datasets 

We evaluate pixel- and object-level classification on five bioimaging datasets spanning a broad range of applications. The datasets were selected to cover diverse acquisition modalities and use cases, including label-free microscopy, flu-orescence microscopy, histopathology, and high-content screening. All datasets and their respective classes are listed in table 2. For the CRC [37] and HBM [5] datasets, additional class preprocessing was required. Specifically, the original dataset labels were mapped to a reduced set of semantic classes, as detailed in Tables 3 and 4. Subsequently, classes that were either underrepresented or semantically irrelevant, such as labels corresponding to undefined or ambiguous objects, were excluded from the analysis (see Tab. 2). In addition, both CRC and HBM provide multi-channel images. In this work, we adopted a simple aggregation strategy by summing all channels into a sin-gle input channel. Although straightforward, this approach does not exploit channel-specific information. Future work could investigate more expressive al-ternatives, such as independent per-channel processing or clustering channels into a three-channel (RGB-like) representation. An overview of the number of image channels and patch sizes for each dataset is given in Table 5. Each dataset was split into fixed training, validation, and test sets (see Table 1), which were kept consistent across all experiments.                              

> Table 1: Train/validation/test splits per dataset (with instance counts). Dataset Train split Val split Test split CRC 1316 images 165 images 166 images 311,993 inst. 40,279 inst. 39,243 inst. HBM 10910 images 1634 images 3030 images 826,419 inst. 118,739 inst. 125,024 inst. PanNuke 2656 images 2523 images 2722 images 63,218 inst. 59,872 inst. 66,654 inst. LIVECell 3158 images 569 images 1512 images 978,433 inst. 435,318 inst. 174,469 inst. Planari 10460 images 1307 images 1309 images 10460 inst. 1307 inst. 1309 inst.

22 C. Teuber et al. 

Table 2: Number of instances per dataset and class. Classes that are marked with  

> †

are not considered in the classification because they are either underrepresented or irrelevant (e.g. Undetermined) Dataset Class Number of Instances CRC [37] Smooth Muscle Cells 26,914 Macrophages 41,716 Granulocytes 20,626 Plasma Cells 8,337 Neoplastic Cells 39,184 B-Cells 12,599 Nerves † 651 CD4+ T Cells 18,159 T-Reg 2,745 CD8+ T Cells 16,333 Adipocytes † 1,709 Others † 49,579 HBM [5] HSPC 6,702 Lymphoid 158,878 Myeloid 417,495 Meg/E 206,656 Mesenchymal 62,761 Endothelial 23,586 Muscle 2,449 Neural † 52 Undetermined † 57,535 PanNuke [18] Neoplastic 77,403 Inflammatory 32,276 Connective/soft tissue 50,585 Epithelial 26,572 Dead cells 2,908 LIVECell [16] A172 130,331 BT474 128,919 BV2 351,630 Huh7 34,107 MCF7 345,819 SHSY5Y 262,519 SkBr3 247,779 SKOV3 86,116 Planari Phenotypically Altered 12,239 Wildtype 837 VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 23 

Table 3: Mapping from original CRC annotations to the reduced set of classes. Original label Mapped class granulocytes Granulocytes vasculature Others CD4+ T cells CD45RO+ CD4+ T cells tumor cells Neoplastic Cells stroma Others CD68+CD163+ macrophages Macrophages adipocytes Adipocytes plasma cells Plasma cells CD8+ T cells CD8+ T cells dirt Others Tregs Treg CD4+ T cells CD4+ T cells CD11c+ DCs Others B cells B cells CD11b+CD68+ macrophages Macrophages smooth muscle Smooth muscle cells undefined Others tumor cells / immune cells Others immune cells / vasculature Others immune cells Others NK cells Others nerves Nerves CD68+ macrophages GzmB+ Macrophages CD68+ macrophages Macrophages lymphatics Others CD11b+ monocytes Others CD4+ T cells GATA3+ CD4+ T cells CD163+ macrophages Macrophages CD3+ T cells Others 24 C. Teuber et al. 

Table 4: Mapping from original HBM annotations to the aggregated class set used in this work. Original label Mapped class AEC Endothelial Adipo-MSC Mesenchymal Adipocyte Mesenchymal Artifact Mesenchymal Autofluorescent Undetermined B-Cells Lymphoid CD34+ CD61+ Meg/E CD4+ T-Cell Lymphoid CD44+ Undetermined Undetermined CD8+ T-Cell Lymphoid CLP Lymphoid Early Myeloid Progenitor Myeloid Endosteal Mesenchymal Erythroblast Meg/E Erythroid Meg/E GATA1neg_Mks Meg/E GATA1pos_Mks Meg/E GMP Myeloid GMP/Myeloblast Myeloid HSC HSPC HSPC HSPC Immature_B_Cell Lymphoid Intermediate Myeloid Myeloid MEP/Early Erythroblast Meg/E Macrophages Myeloid Mature Myeloid Myeloid Monocytes Myeloid Non-Classical Monocyte Myeloid Plasma Cells Lymphoid SEC Endothelial SPINK2+ HSPC HSPC Schwann Cells Neural THY1+ MSC Mesenchymal Undetermined Undetermined VSMC Muscle pDC Myeloid VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 25              

> Table 5: Patch size and image channels per dataset. Dataset Patch size Channels CRC 512 ×512 Multichannel (56 channels) HBM 512 ×512 Multichannel (53 channels) PanNuke 256 ×256 RGB LIVECell 520 ×704 Grayscale Planari 512 ×512 RGB

5.3 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate model performance using the F1 score. In pixel classification, the F1 score is computed at the pixel level by comparing predicted and ground-truth labels across all pixels in the image. In object classification, the F1 score is computed per classified object. The F1 score is defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall: 

F1 = 2 · precision · recall precision + recall  (1) where, for a given class c,

precision c = T P c

T P c + F P c

, (2) recall c = T P c

T P c + F N c

. (3) Here, T P c, F P c, and F N c denote the number of true positives, false positives, and false negatives for class c, respectively. The final F1 score is computed as the macro-averaged F1 across all classes. 

5.4 Classical Baseline Features 

Table 6 summarizes the hand-crafted features used for the classical baseline methods. For pixel-level classification with ilastik, standard multi-scale image features provided by the Vigra backend were employed, including Gaussian smoothing, Laplacian of Gaussian, gradient-based features, and second-order structure descriptors. For object-level classification, ilastik’s internal feature set was used, comprising geometric, intensity-based, and shape-related object de-scriptors. In addition, object-level baselines based on scikit-image’s regionprops were implemented using commonly used morphological and intensity features, such as area, shape descriptors, and intensity statistics. 26 C. Teuber et al. 

Table 6: Overview of the hand-crafted feature sets used for the classical baseline meth-ods. The table lists the features employed for pixel-level and object-level classification using ilastik [7] and object-level classification using regionprops from scikit-image [42]. For pixel-level classification with ilastik, Vigra features were computed at Gaussian scales σ ∈ { 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0}.Methods Implementation Features ilastik Vigra Gaussian Smoothing (pixel classification) Laplacian of Gaussian Gaussian Gradient Magnitude Distance of Gaussians Structure Tensor Eigenvalues Hessian of Gaussian Eigenvalues ilastik ilastik (internal) Object Area (object classification) Mean Intensity Length of the Skeleton Diameter Euclidean Diameter Bounding Box Maximum Bounding Box Minimum Principal components of the object Maximum Intensity Minimum Intensity Center of the object RegionProps scikit-image area (object classification) mean_intensity perimeter eccentricity solidity extent major_axis_length minor_axis_length orientation max_intensity min_intensity centroid VFMs for Pixel and Object Classification in Microscopy 27 

5.5 Ablation Object Feature Computation When performing object-level classification with foundation models, we project instance segmentation masks onto the cor-responding embedding space to extract per-object feature representations. For computational efficiency, we aggregate the pixel-level embeddings by computing simple statistical summaries across each object’s region. Table 7 compares vari-ous aggregation strategies on the LIVECell and PanNuke datasets. Results show that using the mean embedding alone yields the best performance on PanNuke, while combining mean and area (object size) leads to optimal results on LIVE-Cell. Given that object size is a biologically meaningful and highly discriminative feature in microscopy, often correlating with cell type, stage, or morphology, we adopt the mean and area aggregation strategy across all experiments.                             

> Table 7: Ablation of object-level feature aggregation strategies on the PanNuke and LIVECell datasets. Object features are constructed by aggregating pixel-level embed-dings using different combinations of statistical descriptors.
> Dataset Mean Std Area Accuracy Weighted F1
> PanNuke x0.6198 0.6243
> xx0.6024 0.607 xx0.5683 0.5794 xxx0.6029 0.6075 LIVECell x0.8942 0.8953 xx0.8843 0.8853 xx0.8952 0.8964
> xxx0.884 0.885

Upsampling with AnyUp We evaluate the effect of AnyUp upsampling (Sec. 3.1) for feature extraction in the random forest–based methods. AnyUp is used to upsample the embedding representations prior to feature extraction. The un-derlying model is pretrained and applied without further training. Figure 9 compares the mean F1 scores across all training runs obtained with standard interpolation-based upsampling and with AnyUp upsampling. A clear perfor-mance improvement is observed on the LIVECell dataset when using AnyUp, whereas no significant differences are observed for the remaining datasets. Based on this consistent advantage on LIVECell and the absence of negative effects on other datasets, we employ AnyUp upsampling for all experiments. 28 C. Teuber et al. 

Fig. 9: Comparison of standard upsampling via interpolation and AnyUp upsampling for embedding-based feature extraction. Differences in mean F1 scores across training runs are shown for all datasets. AnyUp provides a noticeable performance gain on LIVECell, with no significant differences observed on the other datasets.